Beginning of new Sphinx tutorial (#9276)
sphinx-doc/sphinx: doc/tutorial/index.rst

.. _tutorial:

===============
Sphinx tutorial
===============

In this tutorial you will build a simple documentation project using Sphinx,
and view it in your browser as HTML.
The project will include narrative, handwritten documentation,
as well as autogenerated API documentation.

The tutorial is aimed towards Sphinx newcomers
willing to learn the fundamentals of how projects are created and structured.
You will create a fictional software library to generate random food recipes
that will serve as a guide throughout the process,
with the objective of properly documenting it.

To showcase Sphinx automatic documentation generation capabilities

> we will use Python, which is the default :term:`domain`

Author: ```suggestion
you will use Python, which is the default :term:`domain`
```

(even though several other languages are supported,
they all work in a similar way).

To follow the instructions you will need access to a Linux-like command line
and a basic understanding of how it works,
as well as a working Python installation for development,

> since we will use *Python virtual environments* to create our project

Author: ```suggestion
since you will use *Python virtual environments* to create the project
```

(you can read more about them in the `Python Packaging User Guide`_).

.. _Python Packaging User Guide: https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#creating-a-virtual-environment

Getting started
---------------

Setting up our project and development environment
..................................................

On a new directory,
create a file called ``README.md``
with the following contents:

.. code-block:: markdown

   # Lumache

   **Lumache** (/luˈmake/) is a Python library for cooks and food lovers
   that creates recipes mixing random ingredients.

It is a good moment to create a Python virtual environment

> and install the tools we will need.

Author: ```suggestion
and install the required tools.
```

  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Author name(s)``: Write "``Graziella``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project release []``: Write "``0.1``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project language [en]``: Leave it empty (the default, English)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.

After the last question,
you will see the new ``docs`` directory with some content::

	docs/
	├── build
	├── make.bat
	├── Makefile
	└── source
		├── conf.py
		├── index.rst
		├── _static
		└── _templates

These files are:

- ``build/``: An empty directory (for now)
  that will hold the rendered documentation.
- ``make.bat`` and ``Makefile``: Convenience scripts
  to simplify some common Sphinx operations,
  such as rendering the content.
- ``source/conf.py``: A Python script holding the configuration of the Sphinx project.
  It contains the project name and release you specified to ``sphinx-quickstart``,
  as well as some extra configuration keys.
- ``source/index.rst``: The :term:`master document` of the project,
  which serves as welcome page
  and contains the root of the "table of contents tree" (or *toctree*).

Thanks to this bootstrapping step,

> we already have everything we need

Author: ```suggestion
you already have everything needed
```

> to render our documentation as HTML for the first time.

Author: ```suggestion
to render the documentation as HTML for the first time.
```

   assume a Python virtual environment.

If you executed these instructions correctly, you should have the Sphinx command
line tools available.  You can do a basic verification running this command:

.. code-block:: console

   (.venv) $ sphinx-build --version
   sphinx-build 4.0.2

If you see a similar output, you are on the right path!

Creating the documentation layout
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Then from the command line, run the following command:

.. code-block:: console

   (.venv) $ sphinx-quickstart docs

This will present to you a series of questions required to create the basic
directory and configuration layout for your project inside the ``docs`` folder.
To proceed, answer each question as follows:

- ``> Separate source and build directories (y/n) [n]``: Write "``y``" (without
  quotes) and press :kbd:`Enter`.  - ``> Project name``: Write "``Lumache``"
  (without quotes) and press :kbd:`Enter`.  - ``> Author name(s)``: Write
  "``Graziella``" (without quotes) and press :kbd:`Enter`.  - ``> Project
  release []``: Write "``0.1``" (without quotes) and press :kbd:`Enter`.  - ``>
  Project language [en]``: Leave it empty (the default, English) and press

>   :kbd:`Enter`.

Reviewer: This paragraph looks as if it has been reflowed and was initially a list.  I find strange the inline use of `-` separators.

Author: You're right, thanks a lot. Not having a brilliant day today! Will add it to #9339

.. _tutorial:

===============
Sphinx tutorial
===============

In this tutorial you will build a simple documentation project using Sphinx,
and view it in your browser as HTML.
The project will include narrative, handwritten documentation,
as well as autogenerated API documentation.

The tutorial is aimed towards Sphinx newcomers
willing to learn the fundamentals of how projects are created and structured.
You will create a fictional software library to generate random food recipes
that will serve as a guide throughout the process,
with the objective of properly documenting it.

> To showcase Sphinx automatic documentation generation capabilities

Reviewer 2: Note, *automatic* documentation generation with standalone Sphinx is as far as I know only available for Python.
How about having first a section on the manual documentation using domain directives (which indeed translates quite similarly to other domains), and then an additional section with autodoc for Python?
Thereby the underlying concepts are introduced and then the shorthands on top of that.

Author: It's an excellent point @jakobandersen, I was a bit misguided here. Will rephrase it so it makes more sense.

> you will use Python, which is the default :term:`domain`

Reviewer 3: I think mentioning the default domain is not needed. It's not related to autodoc at all.

Author: Fair enough 👍🏽

(even though several other languages are supported,
they all work in a similar way).

To follow the instructions you will need access to a Linux-like command line
and a basic understanding of how it works,
as well as a working Python installation for development,
since you will use *Python virtual environments* to create the project
(you can read more about them in the `Python Packaging User Guide`_).

.. _Python Packaging User Guide: https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#creating-a-virtual-environment

Getting started
---------------

Setting up our project and development environment

> ..................................................

Reviewer 3: We usually uses `~~~~` for the 3rd level headings. Could you use it?

Author: Sure, didn't notice that. Changing!

On a new directory,
create a file called ``README.rst``
with the following contents:

.. code-block:: rest

   Lumache
   =======

   **Lumache** (/luˈmake/) is a Python library for cooks and food lovers
   that creates recipes mixing random ingredients.

It is a good moment to create a Python virtual environment
and install the required tools.
For that, open a command line terminal,
``cd`` into the directory you just created,
and run the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

>    $ python -m venv .venv

Reviewer 3: Our installation document does not require to install the venv library. So it might not be available in some Linux distro. For example, it is failed in Ubuntu 20.04:
```
root@b5f8ca310971:/# python3 -m venv .venv
The virtual environment was not created successfully because ensurepip is not
available.  On Debian/Ubuntu systems, you need to install the python3-venv
package using the following command.

    apt-get install python3-venv

You may need to use sudo with that command.  After installing the python3-venv
package, recreate your virtual environment.

Failing command: ['/.venv/bin/python3', '-Im', 'ensurepip', '--upgrade', '--default-pip']
```

Author: You're right, this was a concern for me as well. This is a very Ubuntu and Debian-specific problem, but a very prevalent and relevant one. I'd rather keep using virtual environments though. Do you think we should expand `installation.rst` to account for this?

Reviewer 3: IMO, it's important for beginners not familiar with python especially. It's needed to mention in installation.rst or here. It's not a "required" package, but a "recommended" one for the tutorial.

Author: I think it makes more sense in `installation.rst`. I'll update it on this PR if you don't mind.

Reviewer 3: +1

Author: Done!

Reviewer 4: I would like to use `env` instead of `.venv` to disambiguate between the package `venv` and the virtual environment directory `.venv`. It's also a couple of characters shorter to type, it is visible in operating system UIs, and it's less of a mouthful to pronounce when read aloud. Trainers who would use this tutorial's material in presentations will thank you for it.

  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project name``: Write "``Lumache``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Author name(s)``: Write "``Graziella``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project release []``: Write "``0.1``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project language [en]``: Leave it empty (the default, English)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.

After the last question,
you will see the new ``docs`` directory with some content::

	docs/
	├── build
	├── make.bat
	├── Makefile
	└── source
		├── conf.py
		├── index.rst
		├── _static
		└── _templates

These files are:

- ``build/``: An empty directory (for now)
  that will hold the rendered documentation.
- ``make.bat`` and ``Makefile``: Convenience scripts
  to simplify some common Sphinx operations,
  such as rendering the content.
- ``source/conf.py``: A Python script holding the configuration of the Sphinx project.
  It contains the project name and release you specified to ``sphinx-quickstart``,
  as well as some extra configuration keys.
- ``source/index.rst``: The :term:`master document` of the project,
  which serves as welcome page

>   and contains the root of the "table of contents tree" (or *toctree*).

Reviewer 3: I think it's better to use a definition list instead. What do you think?

Author: Good idea! Will change it

.. code-block:: bash

   (.venv) $ sphinx-build -b html docs/source/ docs/build/html

And finally, open `docs/build/html/index.html` in your browser.
You should see something like this:

.. image:: /_static/tutorial/lumache-first-light.png

There we go! You created your first HTML documentation using Sphinx.

Making some tweaks to the index
...............................

The ``index.rst`` file that ``sphinx-quickstart`` created
has some content already,
and it gets rendered as the front page of our HTML documentation.
It is written in reStructuredText,
a powerful markup language.

Modify the file like follows:

.. code-block:: rest

   Welcome to Lumache's documentation!
   ===================================

   **Lumache** (/luˈmake/) is a Python library for cooks and food lovers
   that creates recipes mixing random ingredients.
   It pulls data from the `Open Food Facts database <https://world.openfoodfacts.org/>`_
   and offers a *simple* and *intuitive* API.

   .. note::

      This project is under active development.

This showcases several features of the reStructuredText syntax, including:

- a **section header** using ``===`` for the underline,

> - two examples of **inline markup**: ``**bold**`` and ``*italics*``,

Reviewer 3: FYI: Accurately, these are `**strong emphasis**` and `*emphasis*`. Surely they're rendered as bold and italic usually. I don't know which wording is better for beginners. But we need to know they're different things and choose better representation.
https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#emphasis

refs: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/strong#%3Cb%3E_vs._%3Cstrong%3E

Author: You're right, let's use the original terminology here. Changing!

===============

In this tutorial you will build a simple documentation project using Sphinx,
and view it in your browser as HTML.
The project will include narrative, handwritten documentation,
as well as autogenerated API documentation.

The tutorial is aimed towards Sphinx newcomers
willing to learn the fundamentals of how projects are created and structured.
You will create a fictional software library to generate random food recipes
that will serve as a guide throughout the process,
with the objective of properly documenting it.

To showcase Sphinx capabilities for code documentation
you will use Python,
which also supports *automatic* documentation generation.

.. note::

   Several other languages are natively supported in Sphinx
   for *manual* code documentation,
   however they require extensions for *automatic* code documentation,
   like `Breathe <https://breathe.readthedocs.io/>`_.

To follow the instructions you will need access to a Linux-like command line
and a basic understanding of how it works,
as well as a working Python installation for development,
since you will use *Python virtual environments* to create the project.

Getting started
---------------

> Setting up our project and development environment

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Setting up your project and development environment
```
and underline to go with this.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> On a new directory,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In a new directory,
```

create a file called ``README.rst``

> with the following contents:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
with the following content.
```

.. code-block:: rest

   Lumache
   =======

   **Lumache** (/luˈmake/) is a Python library for cooks and food lovers
   that creates recipes mixing random ingredients.

It is a good moment to create a Python virtual environment
and install the required tools.
For that, open a command line terminal,
``cd`` into the directory you just created,
and run the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ python -m venv .venv
   $ source .venv/bin/activate
   (.venv) $ python -m pip install sphinx

.. note::

   The installation method used above
   is described in more detail in :ref:`install-pypi`.
   For the rest of this tutorial,
   the instructions will assume a Python virtual environment.

If you executed these instructions correctly,
you should have the Sphinx command line tools available.
You can do a basic verification running this command:

.. code-block:: bash

   (.venv) $ sphinx-build --version
   sphinx-build 4.0.2

If you see a similar output, you are on the right path!

Creating the documentation layout
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Then, from the command line,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Then from the command line,
```

run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

   (.venv) $ sphinx-quickstart docs

> This will present you a series of questions

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This will present to you a series of questions
```

required to create the basic directory and configuration layout for your project

> inside the `docs/` folder.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
inside the ``docs`` folder.
```

Its name is "docs", not "docs/".

> To proceed, introduce these answers:

Reviewer 4: Answer each question as follows.

Author: I observed that you tend to remove colons at the end of sentences that end in "as follows", whereas you are okay with some other sentences that precede enumerations or instructions. I'd be keen to learn more, would you please share some explanations about it?

Author: English.SE seems to disagree https://english.stackexchange.com/a/394875/20057

Reviewer 4: First I should preface that the dominant practice should be continued, but I don't know what that is for Sphinx. A style guide should be adopted. @tk0miya is there an established preferred style in Sphinx for how to end a sentence when followed by a list or code block?

There are varying opinions about ending a sentence with a colon or a period when followed by a _list_, but not many about following it with _code_. The context and audience need to be considered. For example, technical documentation versus a narrative tutorial. Even American and English English don't agree. No one way is correct, as they are all opinions. I may have been inconsistent when spotting these instances and reviewing them. Apologies for that.

Some guides prefer to end all sentences with a period and never a colon. I prefer this style because it prevents the confusion of what punctuation to use when ending a sentence, as they _always_ end with a period without exception. It avoids sentence fragments, such as "For example:" and encourages the writer to form complete sentences. This is especially helpful for visually impaired readers and screen readers. It prevents the confusion of whether to use `:` or `::` when a code block follows to get syntax highlighting.

"As follows", "following", and similar phrases are hints to readers—especially visually impaired or people with reading comprehension impairments—that something is coming up related to this sentence, so I almost always include them.

Reviewer 3: >is there an established preferred style in Sphinx for how to end a sentence when followed by a list or code block?

AFAIK, there are no policies and rules for them.

IMO, reST provides `::` syntax to notate a code-block after a paragraph
```
blah blah blah::

    here is a code block.
```

This is rendered as following.
```
blah blah blah:

    here is a code block.
```

So I think the sentences that end with a colon just before code-block are commonly used in reST documents. I've usually written them also. To imitate the colon at the tail of the sentence, I've usually use a single colon and `code-block` directive as follows

```
blah blah blah:

.. code-block:: some-highlighting language

   here is a code block.
```

On the other hand, I don't see the sentences that end with a colon just before bullet-list much.

- ``> Separate source and build directories (y/n) [n]``: Write "``y``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project name``: Write "``Lumache``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Author name(s)``: Write "``Graziella``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project release []``: Write "``0.1``" (without quotes)
  and press :kbd:`Enter`.
- ``> Project language [en]``: Leave it empty (the default, English)

>   and press :kbd:`Enter`.

Reviewer 4: Are the `>` actually displayed on screen? If not, then please omit them. When rendered to HTML, there are both bullet points and `>` symbols which is visually distracting.

Author: This is the output of `sphinx-quickstart`:

```
$ sphinx-quickstart docs
Welcome to the Sphinx 3.5.4 quickstart utility.

Please enter values for the following settings (just press Enter to
accept a default value, if one is given in brackets).

Selected root path: docs

You have two options for placing the build directory for Sphinx output.
Either, you use a directory "_build" within the root path, or you separate
"source" and "build" directories within the root path.
> Separate source and build directories (y/n) [n]: y

The project name will occur in several places in the built documentation.
> Project name: Lumache
> Author name(s): Graziella
> Project release []: 0.1

If the documents are to be written in a language other than English,
you can select a language here by its language code. Sphinx will then
translate text that it generates into that language.

For a list of supported codes, see
https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-language.
> Project language [en]: 

Creating file /tmp/docs/source/conf.py.
Creating file /tmp/docs/source/index.rst.
Creating file /tmp/docs/Makefile.
Creating file /tmp/docs/make.bat.

Finished: An initial directory structure has been created.

You should now populate your master file /tmp/docs/source/index.rst and create other documentation
source files. Use the Makefile to build the docs, like so:
   make builder
where "builder" is one of the supported builders, e.g. html, latex or linkcheck.
```

Reviewer 4: Thank you. This is fine.

After the last question,

> you will see the new ``docs`` directory with some content::

Reviewer 4: Let's be explicit about the syntax highlighting. This tree diagram renders with the CSS class `highlight-default`, which is most likely Python, and therefore might render strangely depending on the theme.

```suggestion
you will see the new ``docs`` directory with the following content.

.. code-block:: text
```

> 	docs/

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	docs
```
I noticed that `docs/`, `build`, and `source` are directories, but only `docs/` has a trailing slash. Suggest consistency by removing the trailing slash, as it is not actually included in its name.

Author: Interesting: I copy-pasted the result from the `tree` command, and the trailing slash is retained if the user specifies it:

```
(.venv) $ tree -L 1 docs
docs
├── build
├── make.bat
├── Makefile
└── source

2 directories, 2 files
(.venv) $ tree -L 1 docs/
docs/
├── build
├── make.bat
├── Makefile
└── source

2 directories, 2 files
```

I agree with keeping it consistent, will change.

	├── build
	├── make.bat
	├── Makefile
	└── source
		├── conf.py
		├── index.rst
		├── _static
		└── _templates

> These files are:

Reviewer 4: These items are described as follows.

Author: To avoid repeating "as follows" every time, I changed it to something slightly different.

  such as rendering the content.

``source/conf.py``

  A Python script holding the configuration of the Sphinx project.
  It contains the project name and release you specified to ``sphinx-quickstart``,
  as well as some extra configuration keys.

``source/index.rst``

  The :term:`master document` of the project,
  which serves as welcome page
  and contains the root of the "table of contents tree" (or *toctree*).

Thanks to this bootstrapping step,
you already have everything needed
to render the documentation as HTML for the first time.
To do that, run this command:

.. code-block:: bash

   (.venv) $ sphinx-build -b html docs/source/ docs/build/html

And finally, open `docs/build/html/index.html` in your browser.
You should see something like this:

.. image:: /_static/tutorial/lumache-first-light.png

There we go! You created your first HTML documentation using Sphinx.

Making some tweaks to the index
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``index.rst`` file that ``sphinx-quickstart`` created
has some content already,
and it gets rendered as the front page of our HTML documentation.
It is written in reStructuredText,
a powerful markup language.

> Modify the file like follows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Modify the file as follows.
```

.. code-block:: rest

   Welcome to Lumache's documentation!
   ===================================

   **Lumache** (/luˈmake/) is a Python library for cooks and food lovers
   that creates recipes mixing random ingredients.
   It pulls data from the `Open Food Facts database <https://world.openfoodfacts.org/>`_
   and offers a *simple* and *intuitive* API.

   .. note::

      This project is under active development.

This showcases several features of the reStructuredText syntax, including:

- a **section header** using ``===`` for the underline,
- two examples of **inline markup**: ``**strong emphasis**`` (typically bold)
  and ``*emphasis*`` (typically italics),
- an **inline external link**,

> - and a ``note`` **admonition**.

Reviewer 4: Suggest referencing each term to the Sphinx docs instead of adding strong emphasis.

```suggestion
- and a ``note`` :ref:`rst-directives`.
```

I considered a reference to docutils with [`:dudir:`](https://github.com/sphinx-doc/sphinx/blame/bfca913f1695969f8cb37bfde5ab8609b3b7a907/doc/usage/restructuredtext/basics.rst#L334), but I think that may lead the newcomer astray. Maybe not.

Reviewer 4: Alternatively, we could add explicit labels above each bullet point in the Sphinx docs to have a more specific reference than `rst-directives`.

Author: Changed 👍🏽

> Now, to render it with the new content,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now to render it with the new content,
```

you can use the ``sphinx-build`` command as before,

> or leverage the convenience script like this:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
or leverage the convenience script as follows.
```

.. code-block:: bash

   (.env) $ cd docs/

>    (.env) $ make html

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   (.env) $ make html
```

Whichever name you end up using for the virtual environment, please be consistent.

Author: Good catch!

.. _tutorial:

===============
Sphinx tutorial
===============

In this tutorial you will build a simple documentation project using Sphinx,
and view it in your browser as HTML.
The project will include narrative, handwritten documentation,
as well as autogenerated API documentation.

The tutorial is aimed towards Sphinx newcomers
willing to learn the fundamentals of how projects are created and structured.
You will create a fictional software library to generate random food recipes
that will serve as a guide throughout the process,
with the objective of properly documenting it.

To showcase Sphinx capabilities for code documentation
you will use Python,

> which also supports *automatic* documentation generation.

Reviewer 3: In my understanding, texts should be folded by 80 chars instead of semantic line folding until the discussion, right? It seems some updates are needed.

Author: Sorry, a misunderstanding from my side. Fixing.

Author: Done!
